okay welcome back to Gary's economics
today we are going to update our
predictions for interest rates and house
prices
okay so this video is in response to
popular demand and also to you know
pretty big changes that have happened in
the last month with regards to interest
rates and house prices so I put up my
last video on interest rates probably
about five or six months ago and
generally the predictions I've been
making on this channel are that
before too long within a sort of a year
or so inflation will start to come down
interest rates will start to come down
and that house prices will stay high and
get higher now
a few things have happened in the last
couple of months that have
potentially changed the outlook on this
front so the big thing that happened
was obviously we had the crisis with
Energy prices and the government
responded by
giving out another 150 billion pounds
and also giving a massive tax cut to
richer people
um
when I saw that that was happening
I was very concerned we've got another
video specifically about that which is I
think what called Wireless trusted
energy plan won't work
so if you've watched this channel from
the start you will know in my opinion
the main cause for the inflation that
we're seeing now and have been seeing
for about a year now is the huge amount
of money that was given out by the
government during covid which largely
ended up going to rich people it was 600
billion pounds that's 12 000 pounds per
person but it almost went exclusively to
richer people so they're accumulating
100 200 Grand each so I believe that the
inflation was caused by that money being
given out
that caused the cost of living Christ
for ordinary people
and the government is responding by
giving out another 150 billion pounds
which in this case largely is going
directly to energy companies and also
tax cuts over to people
so you can see why I think I'm concerned
about this policy because
they gave out a ton of money to rich
people that caused inflation across the
living crisis and they're trying to deal
with that by giving another ton of money
to rich people so when that happened I
looked at that and I thought there's
potential here
for a kind of an inflationary spiral
because it is not being largely
understood that the government giving
out money is inflationary and that if
that money goes primarily to rich people
it causes the cost of living crisis for
ordinary people so you could get in a
spiral where they give out money that
caused the cost of living crisis they do
they respond to that by giving up more
money which goes to rich people which
causes a worsening cost of living crisis
they give out more money and you could
just see inflation spiraling and
interest rates going up alongside that
because the the bank of England
basically has to respond to Rising
inflation and at the same time living
stand is decreasing so I was very
worried about that so I I put a trade on
where I
basically put a big bet on interest
rates Rising so I wanted to let you guys
know that I did that
um
what happened after that was that
essentially financial markets refused to
allow the government to fully implement
their spending plan in particular they
they kind of forced the u-turn on the
tax cuts for richer people
um that is good obviously I don't think
anyone be surprised I'm happy about that
but the government is still running a
massive deficit and there still is
potential that that will keep inflation
higher going forward
because of the prospects of higher
inflation
both the bank financial markets expect
the bank of England to raise rates much
more aggressively so at the moment
financial markets expect that the bank
of England base rate will go up to
something like five and a half percent
that's very volatile this video might
not go out for a week and a half or so
so it might have changed by then
um I'll probably post on my Twitter when
it goes up
um
if interest rates do go up to five and a
half percent then that will mean
mortgage rates going up to sort of
know seven seven half percent for people
with lower deposits you could you could
easily be getting talking about 10
mortgages
so
that if that were to happen that would
massively affect
people who have mortgages
much bigger costs monthly and people who
are trying to get mortgages May well
basically not be able to get the help
get home at all lots and lots of people
are worried about that people want to
know what to do with regards to fixing
mortgages or floating mortgages
people also want to know what's going to
happen to house prices so I think we
need to basically
sit down and deal with these things one
at a time
so the first thing is what are the
prospects for
your mortgage
so interest rates are almost certain to
go up in the next sort of six months to
significantly higher levels if you have
a mortgage which is the fixed rate is
expiring or trying to get a mortgage now
there's basically no way you can avoid
getting having to pay much higher
interest rate payments
um
I think when we say that it's important
that people realize
at the same time this is happening the
government has given a huge amount of
cash to rich people so there is a small
chunk of society that is basically
trying to buy houses
without needing a mortgage so you are
competing with these people who don't
have to pay mortgages which will make it
much more difficult for ordinary people
to buy houses
um if you have a mortgage there's
basically nothing you can do to protect
yourself in the short term
um you can take a fix you can take a
medium a two-year fix a five-year fix
even a 10-year fix
all you're going to be doing is locking
in those High rates
um
will those rates stay high for longer so
I think that very much depends on what
we see from governments
if governments move into this space of
constantly running massive deficits in
response to every crisis then we will
probably get an inflationary crisis that
goes on longer and that means rates
might stay higher for a lot longer
because financial markets basically
refuse to allow the government to run a
very large deficit
it's quite possible that we won't end up
going that way and in which case we'll
probably move towards a more austerity
light
something more like we saw after 2008 in
which case the government tries to slash
the amount of money gives to councils
NHS education welfare payments
um and if that happens you will see a
real squeezing of living standards for
especially poorer people but also people
in the middle that will really starve
the ability to spend of ordinary
families and then you probably see
inflation come down quite quickly and
interest rates come down quite quickly
in which case mortgage payments will
come down but at the same time living
standards will collapse so these two
options are both pretty bad at the
moment we're filming this video it's
during the conservative pie conference
there's basically Carnage in the
conservative party and we don't quite
know which way they're going to go so
we'll probably do another update sooner
um either way it's like a disaster for
ordinary families but one way also
really hits mortgage owners and other
way doesn't
the next question is on oh I should
probably before just finish off on
interest rates
I still think in the medium term both
inflation and interest rates will come
back down the reason I think that is
we're seeing an absolute strangling of
the middle class here and ultimately if
the middle class don't have money then
it's very difficult to see inflation
stay sustained stay high and sustain
level because whilst they're very rich
are getting much richer there's only so
much these guys basically can consume
um but like I say
that is contingent that the government
is not able to keep running massive
deficits if the government does do that
then I think we'll see inflation and
interest rates stay high so as you see
it's difficult at the moment to make a
clear prediction because it very much
depends on government policy I'm an
economic forecaster not a political
forecaster and it depends on what
governments are going to do
so that moves all the house prices
as I've said it's almost certain that in
the next year we'll see a big increase
in interest rates on mortgages we've
already seen a lot of mortgages be
pulled off the market entirely that
makes it very difficult for ordinary
people to buy homes because they
normally dependent on large mortgages
that would also squeeze the spending
part of ordinary families who already
have larger mortgages
because of this I can very much
understand that a lot of people are
predicting Big Falls in the housing
market and I think particularly in the
short term
there are chances that we do see Falls
at the very least to slow down in the
rise largely because if people believe
the prices are falling prices will fall
but also because simply a lot of people
are not able to get mortgages
I think what is missing in that analysis
and what is commonly missing in analyzes
of what is happening in the economy
since covid
is that the simple fact that the rich
are stacking up so much money here that
150 billion pounds that has been given
out in the recent budget largely to
energy companies that will end up in the
bank account of the people who own the
shares of the energy companies who are
wealthy people right so that's another
150 billion pounds into the bank
accounts of the rich on top of the 600
billion pounds which has already been
given to the rich in the last three
years that's a total of 750 billion
pounds that's an enormous amount of
money that's 15 000 pounds for everyone
in the country that means again 200 300
Grand per person for richer people so
even though you
can't afford your mortgage and you can't
get a mortgage
you are competing with the very rich to
buy houses and they are just seeing this
enormous flow of cash coming from the
government so
ultimately what the rich people do when
they're given cash they they buy assets
it's the main thing that they buy
because you know they already have very
high spending they don't need to spend
much more
um
so ultimately you know in a sense we are
repeating the mistakes of covid which is
we're trying to
solve a problem which is caused by
inequality by giving cash out in such a
way that it increases inequality
um and that means that you we will
continue to see this massive
accumulation of cash by the rich and
because of that I can't see houses doing
anything in the medium to long term
other than going up in price and that is
simply because we are giving so much
money to the rich
and you could see this sort of nightmare
combination of it'd be hard to get a
mortgage and house prices going up which
basically will continue this trend we've
seen for the last 15 years now or maybe
even 20 25 years of it becoming
increasingly impossible for people from
ordinary families to get property
um because you know in the last 10 15
years it has been possible if you have a
very good job and a very high income and
you save for a long time to buy a house
on your own income it's very very
difficult by using larger mortgages but
increasingly you as somebody from an
ordinary family will be competing with
cash buyers from richer families because
they accumulating so much more cash so
this is a very counter consensus
prediction at this point I think in the
next year really anything could happen
to house prices I think there's
definitely chances of a fall
um but I think in the next three four
five years I think we will see big
increases in our Sprites and I think
that is just because people are not
really getting to grips with and it's
totally understandable if you think
about it because most people are not
seeing this big increase in cash
balances people are not quite
understanding just how much cash is
being accumulated by the rich here and
those rich people will use that money to
buy your houses or the kids or the
houses that your kids need
um so once again very pessimistic
predictions here on Gary's economics but
unfortunately I'm the guy who keeps
being right on these things
um so interest rates will go up they'll
probably come back down again but that's
only if Government moves into a more
austerity space which would be a
Devastation for ordinary people's living
conditions uh mortgages will become
harder to get but houses will become
more expensive and other Devastation for
ornery living conditions
the only way to stop this and move to a
better outcome of better living
conditions
better affordability of living better
affordability of housing would be to tax
the rich who of course have accumulated
an enormous amount of money in the last
three years if we were to tax the rich
just to bring them as rich as they were
before covert weekly deep every single
adult in the country 12 000 pounds we
could easily fix this problem but at the
moment the media is not really talking
about that as a solution the
conservative government is of course not
talking about that as a solution which
is why we really need to push the
message this is solvable if we tax the
rich if we don't tax the rich then life
will get worse it will be it'll be your
lives and your kids lives that will get
worse so you know help us spread the
message that we can fix things but only
if we tax the rich because at the moment
it's not on the agenda we need to get on
the agenda you know you know I speak to
people behind the scenes in the labor
party and they say to me look we'll
support it if if people support it so
you know I need you guys to support it
and then I can try and convince these
guys to do it I don't trust them 100 but
at least we can try and get them to move
um so yeah support this message
share the video like comment that that
gets it more seen
um
but yeah the picture is Bleak but you
need to know the reality of the
situation and realistic prediction
what's going to happen
but it can be fixed but only if we get
tax in the rich on the agenda and it's
not on the agenda so um I'm going to
keep talking about it and I would like
you to talk about it more too because
that is the only way to bring us um to a
future that is better for ordinary
families okay thank you like subscribe
share see you later
if you get a bit more money and the rich
get a lot more money you will become
poorer and you need to have a policy
which actively focuses on reducing
energy consumption of the rich and
support support and it's not there
[Music]